Digdirator doc (#103)
nais/doc: addons/idporten.md

---
description: >
  Provisioning and configuration of accompanying ID-porten clients for authentication and authorization in public facing 
  web applications.
---

# ID-porten Clients

An accompanying ID-porten Client can be automatically provisioned to your NAIS application. 

The ID-porten Client will be configured with sane defaults to enable usage in both authentication and/or authorization 
for public facing web applications.

[Digdirator] generates a Kubernetes Secret containing the values needed for your application to integrate ID-porten, 
e.g. credentials and URLs. The secret will automatically be mounted to the pods of your application during deploy.

> Every deploy will trigger rotation of credentials, invalidating any jwk´s that are not in use. 

Reviewer: Dette betyr at man egentlig har to jwk som man kan bruke samtidig? Er kanskje ikke et stort problem.

Author: Ja, de er sant, de er for å ikke få nedetid ved ny deploy. Dette ryddes vekk av digdirator ved neste deploy hvis en pod har kommet i enn annen state, hvis de er de du tenker på?

Reviewer: Mhm, men er det noen krise om en app ikke deployes på et halv år? For noe apper blir ikke deploet så ofte. Så da har man potensielt et token som lever veldig lenge, som ikke er i bruk.

Author: tror ikke de er en krise nei.

- User (citizens) sign-in with SSO, using [OpenID Connect with Authorization Code]
- Request chains involving an end-user whose identity and permissions should be propagated through each service/web API, 
using the [OAuth 2.0 Token Exchange].

See the [TokenX Documentation] for NAV-specific usage.

For more information about integration with provider see [ID-porten Integration guide].

### Getting Started

#### Minimal Example

The very minimal example configuration required in [`nais.yaml`](../nais-application/reference.md#spec-idporten)
to enable auto-provisioning of an ID-porten client for your application.

```yaml
apiVersion: "nais.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "Application"
metadata:
  name: nais-testapp
  namespace: aura
  labels:
    team: aura
spec:
  image: navikt/nais-testapp:66.0.0
  idporten:
    enabled: true
  # required for on-premises only
  webproxy: true
  # required for GCP only
  accessPolicy:
    outbound:
      external:
        - host: oidc-ver2.difi.no
```

This will register an ID-porten client using the following naming scheme: 
```
<cluster>:<metadata.namespace>:<metadata.name>
```

For the example above, the result would be:
```
dev-gcp:aura:nais-testapp

> ```

Author: Also true, salut

#### Full Example

```yaml
apiVersion: "nais.io/v1alpha1"
kind: "Application"
metadata:
  name: nais-testapp
  namespace: aura
  labels:
    team: aura
spec:
  image: navikt/nais-testapp:66.0.0
  idporten:
    enabled: true

>     clientName: NAV - DEV

Reviewer 2: Slenge på en kommentar om at clientName må være unikt for hele IDPorten? (for det må det vel være?)

Reviewer: Hvis denne må være unik, så tror jeg det kunne være fornuftig å legge inn en verdi som ikke er gyldig yaml, så vi ikke ender opp med klipp/lim uhell.

Author: Client_name er ikke unikt

Author: Men bør beskrive plassen som sluttbruker prøver å logge seg på. Som NAV eller liknande, denne verdien har en default vill jeg huske hvis man ikke setter den nåe i stil med Arbeids og velferds direktoratet

Author: ARBEIDS- OG VELFERDSETATEN 😎

    clientURI: "https://nav.no"
    redirectURI: "https://my.application.dev.nais.io/callback"

>     frontchannelLogoutURI:
>       - "https://my.application.dev.nais.io/logout"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    frontchannelLogoutURI: "https://my.application.dev.nais.io/logout"
```

    postLogoutRedirectURIs:
      - "https://nav.no"
    # refresh token last for 6 hours
    refreshTokenLifetime: 21600
  ingresses:
    - "https://my.application"
    - "https://my.application.dev.nais.io"
  accessPolicy:
    inbound:
      rules:
        - application: app-a
          namespace: othernamespace

>         - application: app-b

Author: true that, i was thinking tokenX

    # required for GCP only
    outbound:
      external:
        - host: oidc-ver2.difi.no
  # required for on-premises only
  webproxy: true
```

### Redirect URI

{% hint style="info" %}
Note that `spec.idporten.redirectURI` can be omitted **if** a single `spec.ingresses` are specified.
{% endhint %}

The ingress specified will generate a redirect URL using the formula:

```
spec.ingresses + "/oauth2/callback"
```

In other words, this:

```yaml
spec:
  idporten:
    enabled: true
  ingresses:
    - "https://my.application.dev.nais.io"
```

is equivalent to this:

```yaml
spec:
  idporten:
    enabled: true
    redirectURI: "https://my.application.dev.nais.io/oauth2/callback"
  ingresses:
    - "https://my.application.dev.nais.io"
```

You may override the redirect URL manually by specifying `spec.idporten.redirectURI`. 

If you for any reason have several ingresses
```yaml
spec:
  idporten:
    enabled: true
  ingresses:
    - "https://my.application.dev.nais.io"
    - "https://my.application/"
```

> Specifying `spec.idporten.redirectURI` is **mandatory** in your nais.yml

Reviewer: Er det kun lov med en redirect-url?

Author: Ja, her får jeg be @tommytroen eller @tronghn avare for meg 😁

Reviewer 3: Går for kun én for nå, så kan vi tilpasse oss senere hvis det er behov for det.

```yaml
spec:
  idporten:
    enabled: true
    redirectURI: "https://my.application/oauth2/callback"
  ingresses:
    - "https://my.application.dev.nais.io"
    - "https://my.application/"
```

{% hint style="danger" %}
Specifying `spec.idporten.redirectURI` will replace the auto-generated redirect URI.
{% endhint %}

### Local Testing

> **TODO**

Author: agree

    {
      "use": "sig",
      "kty": "RSA",
      "kid": "jXDxKRE6a4jogcc4HgkDq3uVgQ0",
      "n": "xQ3chFsz...",
      "e": "AQAB",
      "d": "C0BVXQFQ...",
      "p": "9TGEF_Vk...",
      "q": "zb0yTkgqO...",
      "dp": "7YcKcCtJ...",
      "dq": "sXxLHp9A...",
      "qi": "QCW5VQjO...",
      "x5c": [
        "MIID8jCC..."
      ],
      "x5t": "jXDxKRE6a4jogcc4HgkDq3uVgQ0",
      "x5t#S256": "AH2gbUvjZYmSQXZ6-YIRxM2YYrLiZYW8NywowyGcxp0"
    }
  IDPORTEN_REDIRECT_URI: https://my.application/callback
  IDPORTEN_WELL_KNOWN_URL: https://oidc-ver2.difi.no/idporten-oidc-provider/.well-known/openid-configuration
```

## JWT as authentication method
Provisioning of ID-porten client defaults to `private_key_jwt` as client authentication method [OpenID Connect Core 1.0, 9. Client Authentication].
Application `grant_type` (or flows) are methods your application use in order to obtain Access Tokens from an provider: `grant_type` -> `urn:ietf:params:oauth:grant-type:jwt-bearer`.

Make sure to set `aud` value explicit to `issuer` found in [ID-porten well-known]. 

For more details about ID-porten and JWT, see the [JWT grant documentation, same as for Maskinporten].

> The final JWT created and send to ID-porten may look like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The final JWT assertion created and sent to ID-porten may look like this:
```

> Header, `kid` is keyId retrieved from **`Secrets`** -> `IDPORTEN_CLIENT_JWK`.
> ```json
> {
>   "kid": "225ed7ac-33eb-4ce3-bc86-6af40e56868f",
>   "alg": "RS256"
> }
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Header

- `kid` is the key ID retrieved from the your client's JWK, found in the [associated secret](#runtime-configuration-and-credentials) at `IDPORTEN_CLIENT_JWK`.

```json
{
  "kid": "225ed7ac-33eb-4ce3-bc86-6af40e56868f",
  "alg": "RS256"
}
```
```

> Body, `issuer` in JWT is retrieved from **`Secrets`** -> `IDPORTEN_CLIENT_ID` and `aud` is as described earlier the `issuer` found in [ID-porten well-known]. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Body

- `iss` is found in the [associated secret](#runtime-configuration-and-credentials) at `IDPORTEN_CLIENT_ID`
- `aud` is as described earlier the `issuer` found in the [ID-porten metadata discovery document] at `IDPORTEN_WELL_KNOWN_URL`
```

```json
{
  "aud": "https://oidc-ver2.difi.no/idporten-oidc-provider/",
  "scope": "openid",
  "iss": "e89006c5-7193-4ca3-8e26-d0990d9d981f",
  "exp": 1520589928,
  "iat": 1520589808,
  "jti": "415ec7ac-33eb-4ce3-bc86-6ad40e29768f"
}
```

## Migrating from existing infrastructure-as-code ([IaC]) solution

### Why migrate?

> For the same reason as for Azure AD Application:

Author: oki

and should be treated as such.

### Migrating - step-by-step

#### 1. Give your application a new description in the [IaC]

In order for NAIS -> [Digdirator] to pick up and update your ID-porten client, the **`description`** of the client registered in 
the [IaC] should match the expected format:

```
<cluster>:<namespace>:<app-name>
```

E.g.

```
dev-gcp:aura:my-app
```

Make sure that you are aware of and configure if necessary the value of `spec.idporten.redirectURI`. As redirectURI
will be generated in this form: `https://my.application.ingress/oauth2/callback`

Take also in consideration to set other values explicit in [`nais.yaml`](../nais-application/reference.md#spec-idporten) 
as [Digdirator] overrides existing one:  
`spec.idporten.clientName`  
`spec.idporten.refreshTokenLifetime`  
`spec.idporten.clientURI`  
`spec.idporten.redirectURI`  
`spec.idporten.frontchannelLogoutURI[]`  
`spec.idporten.postLogoutRedirectURIs[]`  

## Deletion

The ID-porten client is automatically deleted whenever the associated Application resource is deleted. 
In other words, if you delete your NAIS application the ID-porten client is also deleted. This will result in

> a **_new and different_** client ID in ID-porten if you re-create the application after deletion.

Reviewer: Muligheter for å slette en client id i id-porten? Eller er dette kanskje en uuid, så dette er egentlig ikke et problem?

Annet spørsmål, vil man ha behov for å kunne gjenbruke en client id?

Author: Med client ID, menes egentlig faktisk klient konfiguration. Så for å ikke få Stakke opp ID-porten med en massa klienter som ikke brukes så er de bra de blir slettet, en klient er ganske tett bundet appen. Men er klienten slettet i maskinporten vill du ikke kunne hente den samme med damme client id. Men en opprettelse av en ny, vill gi deg samme config som førre men ny klient ID og jwk
